README.md, before:

# Personal Kubernetes Homelab

This is the repo I use to manage the bare metal k8s cluster I setup at home out of some old laptops that were donated by friends and family.

# Setup

## Bootstrapping Secrets

This repo uses [sops-nix](https://github.com/Mic92/sops-nix) to manage sensitive data. There are many ways to encrypt secrets in sops, and many existing guides for setting up and managing those keys, so I won't repeat them here.
For a more in depth guide, refer to [MuSigma's guide](https://musigma.blog/2021/05/09/gpg-ssh-ed25519.html) or [drduh's guide](https://github.com/drduh/YubiKey-Guide?tab=readme-ov-file#prepare-gnupg)

I'm using a Yubikey-backed ed25519 GPG key to encrypt secrets on my development machine, and each host's SSH key to decrypt them on deployment.

### Bootstrapping the host keys

For each host managed by colmena, we're going to use its ssh key to decrypt secrets.
Sops does not support ssh directly, so the keys are converted to age keys:

`nix-shell -p ssh-to-age --run 'ssh-keyscan <host> | grep ssh-ed25519 | ssh-to-age'`

### Sops-nix setup

Now that we have the keys, we'll add the key identifier (GPG fingerprint, age public key) to `.sops.yaml` at the root of the repo:

```yaml
---
keys:
  - &user_<username> <GPG Fingerprint>
  - &host_<host> <age public key>
```

Then we can reference those keys in the configuration for sops-managed files:

```yaml
creation_rules:
  - path_regex: hosts/<host>/secrets.ya?ml
    key_groups:
    - pgp:
      - *user_<username>
      age:
      - *host_<host>
```

### Adding secrets

With sops configuration in place, one can simply run `sops edit path/to/secrets.yaml`.
This will create or decrypt the file and open it in the editor defined in `$EDITOR`.

### Referencing secrets

First add the sops import and configuration to your configuration.nix:

```nix
imports = [ <sops-nix/modules/sops> ];

sops = {
  defaultSopsFile = ./path/to/secrets.yaml;
  # This will automatically import SSH keys as age keys
  age.sshKeyPaths = [ "/etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key" ];
};

```

Then you can add individual secret attributes that reference specific fields in secrets.yaml.
Sub-fields can be accessed using `/` as a separator between field names.

The following snippet has an example secret with common options documented in comments.
See the [sops-nix](https://github.com/Mic92/sops-nix) README for more examples and options.

<details>
<summary>sops.secret</summary>

```nix
sops.secrets.my_secret = {
  # The sops file can be overwritten per secret...
  # sopsFile = ./other-secrets.json;
  # The format of the sops file. Defaults to "yaml" but you can also use "json" or "binary"
  # format = "yaml"

  # Permission modes are in octal representation (same as chmod)
  # mode = "0440";
  # Either a user id or group name representation of the secret owner
  # It is recommended to get the user name from `config.users.users.<?name>.name` to avoid misconfiguration
  # owner = config.users.users.nobody.name;
  # Either the group id or group name representation of the secret group
  # It is recommended to get the group name from `config.users.users.<?name>.group` to avoid misconfiguration
  # group = config.users.users.nobody.group;

  # It is possible to restart or reload units when a secret changes or is newly initialized.
  # restartUnits = [ "home-assistant.service" ];
  # there is also `reloadUnits` which acts like a `reloadTrigger` in a NixOS systemd service

  # Users are normally setup before secrets are resolved.
  # Set this to true if the secret is needed to setup users.
  # neededForUsers = true;

  # Some services might expect files in certain locations. Using the path option a symlink to this directory can be created:
  # path = "/var/lib/hass/secrets.yaml";
};
```

</details>

These secrets will be decrypted under `/run/secrets` (or `/run/secrets-for-users` if the secret is `neededForUsers`).
You can reference the secret's path from elsewhere in the config using the `.path` attribute,
e.g. `users.users.my-user.hashedPasswordFile = config.sops.secrets.my-password.path;`.

## Bootstrapping k3s cluster

Start your first k3s server with `services.k3s.clusterInit = true;`. See modules/k3s/k3s.nix for a full example.

Once applied, log into the host and check that k3s is running with `sudo systemctl status k3s.service`. Check the k3s logs for errors as well `sudo journalctl -fu k3s.service`.

Get the contents of the k3s token and kubernetes config secrets at /var/lib/rancher/k3s/server/token and /etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml respectively, and save them under modules/k3s/kubeconfig.enc.yaml and hosts/<hostname>/secrets.yaml:k3s_token respectively.

# Deployment

From the project root directory, run `colmena apply --experimental-flake-eval`.

Commit message:

Reorganize config, remove redundant nixos-hardware module in favor of facter

README.md, after:

# Personal Kubernetes Homelab

This is the repo I use to manage the bare metal k8s cluster I setup at home out of some old laptops that were donated by friends and family.

# Setup

## Bootstrapping Secrets

This repo uses [sops-nix](https://github.com/Mic92/sops-nix) to manage sensitive data. There are many ways to encrypt secrets in sops, and many existing guides for setting up and managing those keys, so I won't repeat them here.
For a more in depth guide, refer to [MuSigma's guide](https://musigma.blog/2021/05/09/gpg-ssh-ed25519.html) or [drduh's guide](https://github.com/drduh/YubiKey-Guide?tab=readme-ov-file#prepare-gnupg)

I'm using a Yubikey-backed ed25519 GPG key to encrypt secrets on my development machine, and each host's SSH key to decrypt them on deployment.

### Bootstrapping the host keys

For each host managed by colmena, we're going to use its ssh key to decrypt secrets.
Sops does not support ssh directly, so the keys are converted to age keys:

`nix-shell -p ssh-to-age --run 'ssh-keyscan <host> | grep ssh-ed25519 | ssh-to-age'`

### Sops-nix setup

Now that we have the keys, we'll add the key identifier (GPG fingerprint, age public key) to `.sops.yaml` at the root of the repo:

```yaml
---
keys:
  - &user_<username> <GPG Fingerprint>
  - &host_<host> <age public key>
```

Then we can reference those keys in the configuration for sops-managed files:

```yaml
creation_rules:
  - path_regex: hosts/<host>/secrets.ya?ml
    key_groups:
    - pgp:
      - *user_<username>
      age:
      - *host_<host>
```

### Adding secrets

With sops configuration in place, one can simply run `sops edit path/to/secrets.yaml`.
This will create or decrypt the file and open it in the editor defined in `$EDITOR`.

### Referencing secrets

First add the sops import and configuration to your configuration.nix:

```nix
imports = [ <sops-nix/modules/sops> ];

sops = {
  defaultSopsFile = ./path/to/secrets.yaml;
  # This will automatically import SSH keys as age keys
  age.sshKeyPaths = [ "/etc/ssh/ssh_host_ed25519_key" ];
};

```

Then you can add individual secret attributes that reference specific fields in secrets.yaml.
Sub-fields can be accessed using `/` as a separator between field names.

The following snippet has an example secret with common options documented in comments.
See the [sops-nix](https://github.com/Mic92/sops-nix) README for more examples and options.

<details>
<summary>sops.secret</summary>

```nix
sops.secrets.my_secret = {
  # The sops file can be overwritten per secret...
  # sopsFile = ./other-secrets.json;
  # The format of the sops file. Defaults to "yaml" but you can also use "json" or "binary"
  # format = "yaml"

  # Permission modes are in octal representation (same as chmod)
  # mode = "0440";
  # Either a user id or group name representation of the secret owner
  # It is recommended to get the user name from `config.users.users.<?name>.name` to avoid misconfiguration
  # owner = config.users.users.nobody.name;
  # Either the group id or group name representation of the secret group
  # It is recommended to get the group name from `config.users.users.<?name>.group` to avoid misconfiguration
  # group = config.users.users.nobody.group;

  # It is possible to restart or reload units when a secret changes or is newly initialized.
  # restartUnits = [ "home-assistant.service" ];
  # there is also `reloadUnits` which acts like a `reloadTrigger` in a NixOS systemd service

  # Users are normally setup before secrets are resolved.
  # Set this to true if the secret is needed to setup users.
  # neededForUsers = true;

  # Some services might expect files in certain locations. Using the path option a symlink to this directory can be created:
  # path = "/var/lib/hass/secrets.yaml";
};
```

</details>

These secrets will be decrypted under `/run/secrets` (or `/run/secrets-for-users` if the secret is `neededForUsers`).
You can reference the secret's path from elsewhere in the config using the `.path` attribute,
e.g. `users.users.my-user.hashedPasswordFile = config.sops.secrets.my-password.path;`.

## Setting up a new host

To setup a new host, create the following config:

- ed25519 host ssh key
  - save private key to hosts/<hostname>/secrets.yaml under `ssh_host_private_key`
  - save public key in host configuration (TODO)
  - convert ssh key to age with `nix-shell -p ssh-to-age --run 'ssh-keyscan <host> | grep ssh-ed25519 | ssh-to-age'` and save the public age key to .sops.yaml under `keys`.

## Bootstrapping k3s cluster

Start your first k3s server with `services.k3s.clusterInit = true;`. See modules/k3s/k3s.nix for a full example.

Once applied, log into the host and check that k3s is running with `sudo systemctl status k3s.service`. Check the k3s logs for errors as well `sudo journalctl -fu k3s.service`.

Get the contents of the k3s token and kubernetes config secrets at /var/lib/rancher/k3s/server/token and /etc/rancher/k3s/k3s.yaml respectively, and save them under modules/k3s/kubeconfig.enc.yaml and hosts/<hostname>/secrets.yaml:k3s_token respectively.

# Deployment

From the project root directory, run `colmena apply --experimental-flake-eval`.
